Teams roadmap post (#188)
tinacms/tinacms-site: content/blog/editing-on-the-cloud.md

---
title: How can my editors edit a TinaCMS site?
date: '2019-12-17T20:09:31.626Z'
draft: false
author: James O'Halloran
---

One of the main draws of Tina is that it can give your editors an incredible user experience tailored to their use-case. That being said, it wouldn't be an ideal solution if each editor needed to run their own local development server.

We've been teasing [Tina Teams](/teams 'Tina Teams') as the solution for this. While `Tina Teams` isn't quite ready yet, we'd like to shed some light on how editors can edit on the cloud and where `Tina Teams` fits in.

### Overview

> Typically, Tina will be hidden on your live site, and will only be accessible locally, or on your **cloud development environment**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The typical use case for Tina will be to run it on your **cloud development/staging environment** or locally. you probably won't want to run it on your production site.
```
I don't know if this is better, but I thought the sentence might need some tweaking, so offering this suggestion.

> If your using git as your backend, you could either host your master branch on the cloud development server (and have all commits deployed to your live site), or you could host another staging branch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're using git as your backend, you could either host your master branch on the cloud development server (and have all commits deployed to your live site), or you could host another staging branch.
```

> If your using git as your backend, you could either host your master branch on the cloud development server (and have all commits deployed to your live site), or you could host another staging branch.

Reviewer 3: If *you're

### Hosting ☁️

Part of what makes Tina great is that it gives the developer control. It's important for us to extend this control into the Cloud editing experience. For this reason, we've designed it so that you can **host your development environment wherever you like.**

Already have a Gatsby Cloud plan?
Want to host a small site under Heroku's free tier?

The choice is up to you, depending on your needs!

You can fire up a development environment using one of these services and have users start making commits from the cloud.

> If this isn't something in which you'd like to manage, You'll eventually be able to host your staging environment through us on `Tina Teams`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If this isn't something you'd like to manage, you'll eventually be able to host your staging environment through us on `Tina Teams`.
```

> If this isn't something in which you'd like to manage, you'll eventually be able to host your staging environment through us on `Tina Teams`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this isn't something you'd like to manage, you'll eventually be able to host your staging environment through us on `Tina Teams`.
```

<tip>Depending on your use-case, hosting might be all that you'll need to have your editors editing on the cloud. Otherwise, you might consider using `Tina Teams` for some additional functionality detailed below.</tip>

> ### Authorization 👤

Reviewer: Maybe a ### Tina Teams header here, then the #### Authorization, #### User Management and #### Commit Authoring can be subheaders?

Some services (like Gatsby Previews) will allow you to password protect your environment. If you're hosting somewhere else, you likely don't want strangers accessing your site and making commits. One of the features that `Tina Teams` provides is an **authentication layer over your cloud development environment**. Users will first need to log in before accessing your cloud environment.

> ### User management 👨 👩

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### User Management 👨 👩
```

With Tina Teams, users can have **custom roles assigned to each user**, which can be referenced within your site.

> Maybe you have an external contributor who can only access a specific blog post? An editor who can create, but not delete pages? The implementation is up to you, and your site's needs.

Reviewer 3: No comma after you "The implementation is up to you and your site's needs."

### Commit Authoring 🗣️

Since users will need to authenticate with Tina Teams, we can **tie commits back to the logged-in user**, so you can always find out who put that llama image in your blog post (so you can thank them, of course).
![tinacms-add-new-file-gif](/img/rico-replacement.jpg)

### In Summary

> Not all sites fit into the same box, so we're giving the flexibilty to manage your cloud development environment however makes sense for you. Running a development environment on `Gatsby Previews` without `Tina Teams` will work for some, and certain users may require deeper user management with `Tina Teams`.

Reviewer 3: *flexibility

> Not all sites fit into the same box, so we're giving the flexibility to manage your cloud development environment however makes sense for you. Running a development environment on `Gatsby Previews` without `Tina Teams` will work for some, and certain users may require deeper user management with `Tina Teams`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not all sites fit into the same box, so we're giving the flexibility to manage your cloud development environment however makes sense for you. Running a development environment on `Gatsby Previews` without `Tina Teams` will work for some, and certain users may require deeper user management with `Tina Teams`. We'll soon be posting examples of how to host your cloud development environment on additional services as well.
```
I would add this sentence to this paragraph, then remove this from below:
`We're going to have some examples soon detailing how to host your cloud development environment on a few different services.`

<br />

> We've also got some other "down the road "features planned which will make it much easier to work alongside other team members on your cloud environment: E.g Locking files when being edited by another user. Stay tuned!

Reviewer 3: *e.g

<br />

# ✨

<br />

> Thanks for reading! We're going to have some examples soon detailing how to host your cloud development environment on a few different services. You can also sign up for our [Tina Teams Beta](http://tinacms.org/teams) to try it out early!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thanks for reading! We're going to have some examples soon detailing how to host your cloud development environment on a few different services. You can also sign up for [Tina Teams Early Access](http://tinacms.org/teams) to try it out early!
```

---
title: How can my editors edit a TinaCMS site?
date: '2019-12-17T20:09:31.626Z'
draft: false
author: James O'Halloran
---

> Tina is a toolkit for building a content editing interface directly into your site. Tina differs from traditional CMS's (e.g Forestry, NetlifyCMS, Contentful) which simply allow you to edit your site's content and are relatively detached from your site's code. Having Tina sit in between your content and your site's template gives editors an amazing realtime editing experience where they can navigate to any area of the site, start making changes, and immedietly see these changes reflected within the site.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
TinaCMS allows you to build live-editing functionality directly into your site. Tina differs from other headless CMS's (e.g [Forestry.io](https://Forestry.io), [NetlifyCMS](https://NetlifyCMS.org), [Contentful](https://contentful.com)) which simply allow you to edit your site's content and are relatively detached from your site's code. Having Tina sit in between your content and your site's template gives editors an amazing real-time editing experience where they can navigate to any area of the site, start making changes, and immedietly see these changes reflected within the site.
```

![tina-diagram](/img/how_tina_works_asset.png)

> In most static sites, there are various transformations happening which transform your editor's source content (e.g markdown) into the generated html on your live site. Because of this, Tina will usually need to be run in a live development environment.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With most JAMstack sites, there are various transformations happening which convert your editor's source content (e.g Markdown) into the generated html on your live site. These transformations either happen at build time or while you're running a development server.  For Tina to properly transform content and hot-reload while you edit, it needs to be run in a development environment. 
```

> With most JAMstack sites, there are various transformations happening which transform your editor's source content (e.g markdown) into the generated html on your live site. Because of this, Tina will usually need to be run in a live development environment.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With most JAMstack sites, there are various transformations happening that transform your editor's source content (e.g markdown) into the generated HTML on your live site. These transformations happen either at build time or while running a development server. For Tina to give your editors a live, hot-reloading experience that also transforms content, it needs to be run in a _live development environment_ that's accessible to your editors.
```

> So, do my editors need to run a local dev server to edit a TinaCMS site?

> Nope! You'll be able to setup a **cloud development environment** for your Tina site, and optionally use Tina Teams for some extended collaboration features.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Nope! You'll be able to setup a **cloud development environment** for your Tina site, and optionally use Tina [Teams](https://tinacms.org/teams) for some extended collaboration features.
```

### Hosting Your Cloud Development Environment ☁️

Part of what makes Tina great is that it gives the developer control. It's important for us to extend this control into the Cloud editing experience. For this reason, we've designed it so that you can **host your cloud development environment wherever you like.**

> Already have a Gatsby Cloud plan?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Already have a [Gatsby Cloud](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/cloud/) plan?
```

> Want to host a small site under Heroku's free tier?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Want to host a small site under [Heroku's](https://www.heroku.com) free tier?
```

> The choice is up to you, depending on your needs!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The choice is up to you!
```

You can fire up a **cloud development environment** using one of these services and have users start making commits.

> <tip>If you're using git as your backend, you many choose to host your master branch on the cloud development server (and have all commits deployed to your live site), or you can host a separate staging branch.</tip>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
<tip>If you're using git as your backend, you may choose to host your master branch on the cloud development server (and have all commits deployed to your live site), or you can host a separate staging branch.</tip>
```

### Tina Teams

> Depending on your use-case, hosting might be all that you'll need to have your editors editing on the cloud. Otherwise, you might consider using `Tina Teams` for some additional functionality detailed below...

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Depending on your use case, hosting might be all that you'll need to have your editors editing on the cloud. Otherwise, you might consider using **Tina Teams** for some additional functionality detailed below...
```

##### Authorization 👤

> Some services (like Gatsby Cloud) will allow you to password protect your environment. If you're hosting somewhere else, you likely don't want strangers accessing your site and making commits. One of the features that `Tina Teams` provides is an **authentication layer over your cloud editing environment**. Users will first need to log in before accessing your cloud environment.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Some services (like Gatsby Cloud) will allow you to password protect your environment. If you're hosting somewhere else, you likely don't want strangers accessing your site and making commits. One of the features that **Tina Teams** provides is an _authentication layer over your cloud editing environment_. Users will first need to log in before accessing your cloud environment.
```

##### User Management 👨 👩

With Tina Teams, users can have **custom roles assigned to each user**, which can be referenced within your site.

> Maybe you have an external contributor who can only access a specific blog post? An editor who can create, but not delete pages? The implementation is up to you and your site's needs.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Have an external contributor who can only access a specific blog post? How about an editor who can create, but not delete pages? The implementation is up to you and your site's needs.
```

##### Commit Authoring 🗣️

Since users will need to authenticate with Tina Teams, we can **tie commits back to the logged-in user**, so you can always find out who put that llama image in your blog post (so you can thank them, of course).
![tinacms-add-new-file-gif](/img/rico-replacement.jpg)

### In Summary

> Not all sites fit into the same box, so we're giving the flexibility to manage your **cloud editing environment** however makes sense for you. Running a development environment on `Gatsby Cloud` without `Tina Teams` will work for some, and certain users may require deeper user management with `Tina Teams`. We'll soon be posting examples of how to host your cloud editing environment on additional services as well.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Not all sites fit into the same box, so we're giving you the flexibility to manage your cloud development environment in any way that makes sense for you. Running a development environment on **Gatsby Cloud** without **Tina Teams** will work for some, and certain users may require deeper user management with **Tina Teams**. We'll soon be posting examples of how to host your cloud editing environment on additional services as well..
```

<br />

> We've also got some other "down the road "features planned which will make it much easier to work alongside other team members on your cloud environment: e.g Locking files when being edited by another user. Stay tuned!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We've also got some other "down the road" features planned which will make it much easier to work alongside other team members on your cloud environment, such as locking files when being edited by another user. Stay tuned!
```
